There are a number of things that can
affect the quality of inferences that we
make from data.
This lecture talks about what
can go wrong with inference.
So the basic problems that occur
when we're making inference,
usually result from a violation
of the assumptions that we make
about the population, the sampling
process or the model for the population.
So, I'm kinda talk about
each one of these things and
kinda what happens when there
is some sort of violation.
The first problem is that
the population is not well-defined.
So this is a big problem,
because a vaguely defined population
leads to vague inferences.
The sign that you have a vaguely defined
population is that often the results
are uninterpretable or
difficult to interpret.
And so this is really a problem that
isn't really solved by the data or
affixing the data.
Really, it's about thinking a little bit
more clearly about what type of population
you're trying to make an inference about.
Now the second problem you can have is
an incorrectly specified sampling process.
Now what this results in is that
the sample data will not be representative
of the population.
Often, this is called a convenient sample.
So when you collect data, you collect
data in the most convenient way and
it may just involve.
For example, if you're studying
people in an observational study or
in an experimental study, you just kinda
take whatever people come your way and
enroll them in the study.
This may not involve a sampling process
that represents your population.
It's often just a convenient sample.
And so what the result of this is that
you'll have a what's called selection
bias, so the people in your study will
represent a selection of your population,
but not really the entire population.
And so
the result is that if you fit any models,
if you estimate any characteristics from
your data, those things that you estimate
won't actually apply to the target
population that you originally designated.
They will apply to some other population
that you may not be able to accurately
define.
So even if your model for the population
is correct and even if you have a sense of
what your target population is if your
sampling process is not well specified or
well characterized or
if you don't understand it properly,
then the data that you collect and
the inferences that you make will only
apply to some other population that you
haven't really well characterized yet.
So that's what can result from kind
of incorrectly specifying your
sampling process.
The last part is incorrectly specifying
the model for your population.
Now recall that we said previously
that all models are wrong.
And for sure, you will incorrectly
specify the model for the population.
And so really the goal is not to get the
correct model, but rather to get a model
that's a reasonable approximation for
what the population looks like.
And so if you have the wrong model,
a couple of things may occur.
First, there may be
uncertainty in your estimates
from the data that are not accounted for.
So you may underestimate how certain you
are about certain characteristics of
the population.
Any parameters that you estimate from your
model may end up being uninterpretable.
And so if your model's incorrect,
it doesn't correctly reflect
the relationships in your data in your
population, then your parameters that you
estimate will not really apply to that
population and
may be difficult to interpret.
Furthermore, in prediction
types of problems.
If you don't have the right model, then
it's pretty straightforward to see that
your predictions just may be poor and
they may have a high error rate.
So really what you need to know is kinda
what are the questions that you need to
be asking when you're involved
in a data analysis process?
And so the three basic questions related
to the different kinds of violations that
you might encounter when doing inference.
So the first is can we
characterize the population?
That's a very simple question and
the solution is to really just
do more thinking beforehand.
Before you engage in the inference
process, just take a little bit of extra
time to think about what the population is
and maybe engage in experts in this area.
They may be inside or
outside of your organization.
The second question you wanna ask is
do we understand the sampling process?
So what you wanna do about this is you can
either collect your own data in which case
you can specify what the sampling
process is going to be.
You can maybe collect auxiliary data
about the population characteristics.
So if you have auxiliary data about
the population, maybe certain features of
the population, then you can quantify
the differences between the sample that
you collect and the auxiliary data on the
population to see how different they are.
For example, you might have data on
the sex of people in your study.
And so you might want to know, well if the
population is roughly 50, 50 male, female,
but your dataset is say, 70, 30 male,
female, then you can characterize that
difference between the data you collected
and the population your trying to target.
Again, you can be more specific about
the differences between the two.
So auxiliary data about
the population can be very useful for
characterizing any sort of selection
bias you might have in your sample.
The last question you want to ask is
do you have an appropriate model for
the population?
It's not going to be a perfect model, but
you hope it's a reasonable approximation.
This can be kind of addressed to
a thorough exploratory data analysis or
by using things, for example,
things like robust methods for
inference when you're
fitting statistical models.
Another approach is to
use very flexible models.
Like machine learning methods
that are useful for making very
accurate predictions without you having to
specify very carefully what the model is.
Often, lots of machine learning types of
techniques can just learn the model from
the data without you having
to be very specific about it.
That can be very useful when you don't
have a good understanding about what
the relationships of the population are.
The final challenge to making good
inferences is sampling variability.
Now I've left this to the end for
a reason,
because sampling variability will exist
even if you've done everything else right.
So you've defined the population,
you've described the sampling process,
you've developed a reasonable model for
the population.
By virtue of the fact that
you are sampling data,
you will introduce uncertainty,
because you don't have all the data.
And so every time you draw a sample,
it'll be slightly different and so
anything you estimate about the population
will be slightly different every time you
sample data.
And so we'll talk a little bit more about
this in the lecture about interpreting
data analysis.
But the important thing to know here
is that you should always be asking for
a measure of uncertainty along with any
estimate that's obtained from the data.
So any summary statistic or
any model parameter that you
can estimate from the data,
you should always be asking for a measure
of uncertainty that comes along with it,
because there always will be uncertainty
if you're sampling data from a population.
So just to summarize briefly, always think
about what the population's going to be.
Always assess the sampling process and
think about differences between the data
that you collect and the population that
you're trying to make inferences to.
Always try to diagnose your model
as carefully as possible or
use a very flexible method to
kind of model your population.
And lastly, always require
a measure of uncertainty for
any estimate that you draw from the data.
So these are the kinds of things that
can go wrong with inferences and
how you can try to protect
yourself from these things.